# Def: $\sigma$-alg
Let $\mathcal{M}\subseteq \P(X)$ a collection of sets. We say that $\mathcal{M}$ is a **$\sigma$-algebra** if:
1. $X\in \mathcal{M}$
2. $E\in\M\implies E^C\in\M$ 
3. $\set{E_n}\subseteq\M\implies \cup^\infty_{n} \p{E_n}\in\M$

# Def: Measurable space and sets
We call $\p{X,\M}$ **measurable space**. The sets of $\M$ are called **measurable**.
# Prop. of $\sigma$-alg
1. $\emptyset\in\M$
2.  $\set{E_n}\subseteq\M\implies \cap^\infty_{n} \p{E_n}\in\M$
3. $\M$ is an algebra (the above holds for finite)
4. $E,F\in\M\implies E\setminus F\in\M$
5. let $\Omega\in X$. The restriction $\M|_\Omega$ defined as
	$$\M|_\Omega= \set{F\subseteq\Omega:F=E\cap\Omega,E\in\M} $$ is a $\sigma$-alg on $\Omega$.
# Thm: generator of $\sigma$-alg
Let $G\in\P(X)$. Then it is well defined the $\sa$ generated by $S$ called $\sigma_0(S)$ that is:
1. $S\subseteq \sigma_0(S)$
2. $\forall\sa\,\,\M$ st $S\subseteq \M$ we have $\M\subseteq\sigma_0(S)$  
# Def: Borel Sets
The Borel Sets on a metric space $(X,d)$ are a $\sa$ generated by the open sets.

>[!note] Remark:
> They contains a lot of sets:
> 1. Open sets/Closed sets
> 2. $G_\delta$ sets (countable intersections of open)
> 3. $F_\sigma$ sets (countable union of closed)

>[!note] Remark:
> $\mathcal{B}(\R)$ are equivalently generated by:
> 1. $(a,b),\,[a,b],\,[a,b)$
> 2. $[a,+\infty),\, (-\infty,b)$
> 3. ...

# Def: Measure and Measure space
Let $(X,\M)$ measurable space. We say that $\mu:\M\to [0,\infty]$ is a **(positive)-measure** if:
1. $\mu(\emptyset)=0$
2. $\mu$ is $\sigma$-additive.

We  call $(X,\M,\mu)$ a **measure space**.

# Prop. of a measure
1. **finite add**: let $E,F\in\M$ disjoint, then $$\mu(E\cup F) =\mu(E)+\mu(F)$$
2. **excision**: let $E,F\in\M$ st $E\subseteq F$, then $$\mu(F\setminus E) =\mu(F)-\mu(E)$$
3. **monotonicity**: let $E,F\in\M$ st $E\subseteq F$, then $$\mu(E)\leq\mu(F) $$
4. **$\sigma$-subadd**: let $\set{E_n}\subseteq\M$ then $$\mu\p{\bigcup^\infty_n E_n}\leq\sum^\infty_n\mu(E_n) $$
5. **restriction**: let $\Omega\in\M$. We have this measure space $$\p{X,\M|_\Omega, \mu|_{\M|_\Omega}} $$
7. **continuity over monotone sequences**: let $\set{E_n}\!\nearrow \in\M$ and $E=\lim E_n = \cup^\infty_n E_n$ . Then, $$ \mu(E) = \lim\mu(E_n)$$
# Def: ($\sigma$-)finite measures
We say a measure is:
1. **finite**: if $\mu(X)<\infty$ 
2. $\sigma$-finite: if exists a cover of $X$ made of finte misure sets.
3. **probability measure**: if $\mu(X) = 1$
# E.g. of measures
1. Trivial measure.
2. Counting measure.
3. Dirac measure.
# Def: negligible set
We say a set $T\subseteq X$ is **negligible** if $T\subseteq N$ with $N\in\M,\,\mu(N) = 0$.
# Def: complete measure space
A measure space is said to be complete if all the negligible sets are measurable.
# Thm: completion of a measure space
We can always complete a measure space by enlarging the $\sa$ and the measure. We have to take:
$$
\hat{\M} = \set{ E\in X : \exists F,G\in\M\quad F\subseteq E\subseteq G\quad\mu(G\setminus F) = 0}
$$ that is a $\sa$ and let 
$$
\hat\mu(E)=\mu(F)
$$

# Thm: Ulam
The only measure on $(X,\P(X))$ that has the request of Lebesgue measure (invariance and length of intervals) such that $\lambda\p{\set{x} } = 0\quad\forall x$ is the trivial measure.
# Def: Outer Measure
Let $X$ be a set. The function $\mu^*:\P(X)\to[0,\infty]$ that is:
1. $\mu^*(\emptyset) = 0$
2. $\mu^*$ is $\sigma$-subadd
3. $A\subseteq B\implies\mu^*(A)\leq\mu^*(B)$
is said to be an **outer measure** on $X$.

# Thm: construction of outer measure
Let $\mathcal{E}\subseteq\P(X)$ be a collection of elementary sets and $\rho:\mathcal{E}\to[0,\infty]$ such that $\rho(\emptyset)=0$. For an $A\in\P(X)$ we have an outer measure given by:
$$
\mu^*(A) = \inf\set{\sum^\infty_n\rho(E_n): E_n\in\mathcal{E} \text { such that } E_n \text{ are a cover of } A}
$$

# Def: $\mu^*$-measurable
A set $A\subseteq X$ is called $\mu^*$-measurable if the Caratheodory condition holds:
$$
\forall E\subseteq X\quad \mu^*(E) = \mu^*(E\cap A) +\mu^*(E\cap A^c)
$$
>[!note] Remark:
>This is telling us that the measures from inside coincides with the one from outside.
>If $\mu^*(E)<\infty$ is sufficient to prove the $\geq$.

# Thm: Caratheodory for complete measure space.
Assume that $\mu^*$ is an outer measure. Then the following is a $\sa$ and $\mu^*|_\M$ is a complete measure
$$
\M=\set{A\subseteq X : A\,\,\mu^*\text{-measurable}}
$$
# Def: Lebesgue Measure
Let $\mathcal{E}$ the family of open intervals on $\R^*$ and $\rho\p{(a,b)}=b-a$. We define the outer measure $$\lambda^*(E)=\inf\set{\sum^\infty_{n=1}l(I_n):I_n\text { cover of $E$ made by open intervals}}
$$
and with this we get the Lebesgue $\sa$ denoted by
$$
\L(\R)=\set{A\subseteq X : A\,\,\lambda^*\text{-measurable}}
$$
and from this we get the complete Lebesgue measure
$$
\lambda = \lambda^*|_{\L(\R)}
$$
# Prop. of Lebesgue measure
1. Any countable set is measurable with zero measure.
2. $\mathcal{B(\R)}\subsetneq\L(\R)\subsetneq\P(\R)$
# Thm: regularity of $\lambda$
These are all equivalent:
1. $E\in\L(\R)$
2. $\forall \varepsilon >0 \,\,\exists A\supset E\,\text{ open }\quad \lambda(A\setminus E)<\varepsilon$
3. $\exists G\in G_\delta\,\, G\supset E\quad \lambda(G\setminus E) = 0$
4. $\forall \varepsilon >0 \,\,\exists C\subset E\,\text{ closed }\quad \lambda(E\setminus C)<\varepsilon$
5. $\exists F\in F_\sigma\,\, F\subset E\quad \lambda(E\setminus F) = 0$

# Def: Propriety AE
Let $(X,\M,\mu)$ a complete measure space. We say that a propriety that depends on $x\in X$ **holds AE in $X$** if the set where this propriety does not hold has null measure. 